README.md, before:

# blockpad

A [Go](https://go.dev) package for block cipher paddings.

## Introduction

One type of encryption is the so-called [block cipher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher).
This means that data is processed in blocks of bytes and not byte by byte.
Block ciphers are substitution ciphers.
One block of data is substituted by another block.
The advantage of blocks is that they allow a large mapping space.

However, this type of processing leads to some practical challenges.
Block ciphers need to be used in a specific [mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation).
Some of these modes require that the data are processed in blocks.
These "classic" modes are known by their abbreviations [ECB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Electronic_codebook_(ECB)), [CBC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Cipher_block_chaining_(CBC)) or [PCBC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Propagating_cipher_block_chaining_(PCBC)).

When the last bytes of the clear data are processed a challenge appears:
Most of the time the last clear data will not fill a block completely.
So there has to be a way to know where the real data in the last block ends.
This process is called [padding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)).

Nowadays, usually [AEAD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authenticated_encryption) modes are used, which have built-in integrity protection.
The corresponding modes are referred to as [CCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CCM_mode), [EAX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EAX_mode) , [GCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galois/Counter_Mode), [OCB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OCB_mode) or [SIV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Synthetic_initialization_vector_(SIV)).
These have the advantage that they do not need padding and have a built-in integrity protection.
Attacks such as a [padding oracle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_oracle_attack) are not possible with these modes.
However, the classic modes with additional integrity protection, e.g. through HMACs, are still justified as they are cryptographically more secure than the AEAD modes.
Also, the AEAD modi are sometimes just not feasible, as they can not chain data.

Go has an excellent library of cryptographic primitives.
Strangely, however, it lacks any support for padding.
This library fills that gap and provides an easy-to-use interface for padding and unpadding of data.
Furthermore, padding and unpadding is nearly constant time (see [Appendix](#constant-time)).

## Usage

First one has to create a padder.
This is a data structure that is able to pad or unpad data.
It is created by calling the `NewBlockPad` function:

```
   padder, err := blockpad.NewBlockPad(padAlgorithm, blockSize)
```

`blockSize` is the size of the underlying block cipher's block size.
`padAlgorithm` specifies the pad algorithm to use.
It has one of the following values:

| padAlgorithm        | Meaning                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Zero`              | [Zero padding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#Zero_padding) (ISO 10118-1 and ISO 9797-1 method 1) |
| `PKCS7`             | [PKCS#7 padding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#PKCS#5_and_PKCS#7) (RFC 5652)                     |
| `X923`              | [ANSI X.923](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#ANSI_X9.23) padding                                   |
| `ISO10126`          | [ISO 10126](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#ISO_10126) padding. This is the fastest to unpad.      |
| `RFC4303`           | [RFC 4303](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4303#section-2.4) padding                                           |
| `ISO78164`          | [ISO 7816-4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#ISO/IEC_7816-4) padding (ISO 9797-1 method 2)         |
| `ArbitraryTailByte` | [Arbitrary tail byte padding](https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/098.pdf)                                                     |

> [!CAUTION]
> With CBC mode, nearly all the padding methods enable a very dangerous attack, the so-called padding oracle.
> They must only be used with integrity protection, e.g. by an [HMAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HMAC).
> Only arbitrary tail byte padding is not susceptible to this attack.
> An integrity protection is **always** advisable.

> [!CAUTION]
> When using Zero padding the clear data **must not** end with a 0 byte.
> Zero padding panics if the clear data ends with a 0 byte.

This padder has three public function:

| Function                                | Purpose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Pad([]byte) []byte`                    | Given a byte slice of data, it returns a new byte slice that contains the data with the padding. The new byte slice has a length that is a multiple of the block size.                                                                                         |
| `PadLastBlock([]byte) ([]byte, []byte)` | Given a byte slice of data, it returns a byte slice of the data up to the last block and a new slice containing the last block with padding. The data slice has a length that is a multiple of the block size. The length of the last block is the block size. |
| `Unpad([]byte) ([]byte, error)`         | Given a byte slice of padded data, it returns a byte slice into the original data with the padding removed. If there is something wrong with the padding, the returned byte slice is `nil` and an error is returned.                                           |

### Rational

One may ask why the padding and unpadding has not been implemented with a more traditional call interface like e.g. `Pad(padAlgorithm, blockSize, data)` and `Unpad(padAlgorithm, blockSize, data)`.
There are two reasons for this:

1. Performance: The block size and the pad algorithm are checked only once, when the padder is created. With the traditional interface they would have to be checked on every call, which slows down processing by about 30%.
2. Simplicity: With the creation of a padder the call interface is not cluttered with parameters.

## Example

### Pad

In this example a very simple main program calls an encryption and a decryption function.
It shows how a block cipher and a padder would typically be used for encryption and decryption.

```go
package main

import (
	"bytes"
	"crypto/aes"
	"crypto/cipher"
	"github.com/xformerfhs/blockpad"
	"log"
)

func main() {
	data := []byte(`Beware the ides of march`)

	// ATTENTION: Do not hard-code an encryption key! NEVER!
	key := []byte{
		0x7c, 0xa8, 0x69, 0xbc, 0x54, 0xf5, 0x87, 0x99,
		0xf3, 0x89, 0x09, 0xab, 0x33, 0xfb, 0xdb, 0x5c,
		0x84, 0x09, 0x4c, 0x05, 0x23, 0xc1, 0xb1, 0x07,
		0xa5, 0xea, 0x5d, 0xf7, 0xf5, 0x42, 0x77, 0x42,
	}

	// ATTENTION: Never use a constant initialization vector! NEVER!
	iv := []byte{
		0x11, 0x42, 0xcd, 0x7d, 0xf9, 0x98, 0x46, 0x4d,
		0xd8, 0x58, 0xdd, 0x4e, 0xc8, 0x3b, 0xfd, 0xe9,
	}

	// 1. Create block cipher.
	aesCipher, err := aes.NewCipher(key)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Could not create AES cipher: %v`, err)
	}

	// 2. Create arbitrary tail byte padder.
	var padder *blockpad.BlockPad
	padder, err = blockpad.NewBlockPadding(blockpad.ArbitraryTailByte, aes.BlockSize)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Could not create padder: %v`, err)
	}

	// 3. Encrypt the data with a unique iv for every encryption.
	var encryptedData []byte
	encryptedData, err = doEncryption(aesCipher, iv, padder, data)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Encryption failed: %v`, err)
	}

	// 4. Decrypt the encrypted data.
	var decryptedData []byte
	decryptedData, err = doDecryption(aesCipher, iv, padder, encryptedData)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Decryption failed: %v`, err)
	}

	// 5. Check result.
	if bytes.Equal(data, decryptedData) {
		log.Print(`Success!`)
	} else {
		log.Fatalf(`Decrypted data '%02x' does not match clear data '%02x'`, decryptedData, data)
	}
}

// ******** Private functions ********

// doEncryption encrypts a slice of data.
func doEncryption(blockCipher cipher.Block, iv []byte, padder *blockpad.BlockPad, clearData []byte) ([]byte, error) {
	// 1. Create block mode from cipher.
	encrypter := cipher.NewCBCEncrypter(blockCipher, iv)

	// 2. Pad clear data.
	paddedData := padder.Pad(clearData)

	// 3. Encrypt padded data.
	// After this, paddedData contains the encrypted padded data.
	encrypter.CryptBlocks(paddedData, paddedData)

	return paddedData, nil
}

// doDecryption decrypts a slice of data.
func doDecryption(blockCipher cipher.Block, iv []byte, padder *blockpad.BlockPad, encryptedData []byte) ([]byte, error) {
	// 1. Create block mode from cipher.
	decrypter := cipher.NewCBCDecrypter(blockCipher, iv)

	// 2. Decrypt padded data.
	decryptedData := make([]byte, len(encryptedData))
	decrypter.CryptBlocks(decryptedData, encryptedData)

	// 3. Unpad padded data.
	unpaddedData, err := padder.Unpad(decryptedData)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	return unpaddedData, nil
}
```

### PadLastBlock

In this example a very simple main program calls an encryption and a decryption function.
It shows how a block cipher and a padder would typically be used for encryption and decryption.

```go
package main

import (
   "bytes"
   "crypto/aes"
   "crypto/cipher"
   "github.com/xformerfhs/blockpad"
   "log"
)

func main() {
   data := []byte(`Cryptography is fun`)

   // ATTENTION: Do not hard-code an encryption key! NEVER!
   key := []byte{
      0x0d, 0xf4, 0x9f, 0x19, 0xe5, 0xf3, 0x91, 0x5c,
      0x55, 0xc0, 0x32, 0xc8, 0x51, 0x98, 0x3c, 0xaf,
      0x05, 0xf7, 0x17, 0xef, 0x7d, 0xc8, 0x5d, 0xcb,
      0xf5, 0xb9, 0xed, 0x74, 0x86, 0xec, 0xed, 0x7b,
   }

   // ATTENTION: Never use a constant initialization vector! NEVER!
   iv := []byte{
      0xea, 0xce, 0xff, 0x10, 0x4f, 0x6a, 0x65, 0xae,
      0x7f, 0x78, 0xe7, 0x43, 0x2c, 0x02, 0x66, 0xf0,
   }

   // 1. Create block cipher.
   aesCipher, err := aes.NewCipher(key)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Could not create AES cipher: %v`, err)
   }

   // 2. Create arbitrary tail byte padder.
   var padder *blockpad.BlockPad
   padder, err = blockpad.NewBlockPadding(blockpad.ArbitraryTailByte, aes.BlockSize)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Could not create padder: %v`, err)
   }

   // 3. Encrypt the data with a unique iv for every encryption.
   var encryptedFullData []byte
   var encryptedLastBlock []byte
   encryptedFullData, encryptedLastBlock, err = doEncryptionWithPadLastBlock(aesCipher, iv, padder, data)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Encryption failed: %v`, err)
   }

   // 4. Decrypt the encrypted data.
   var decryptedFullData []byte
   var decryptedLastBlock []byte
   decryptedFullData, decryptedLastBlock, err = doDecryptionWithPadLastBlock(aesCipher, iv, padder, encryptedFullData, encryptedLastBlock)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Decryption failed: %v`, err)
   }

   // 5. Check result.
   clearFullBlockData := data[:len(encryptedFullData)]
   clearLastBlockData := data[len(encryptedFullData):]
   if bytes.Equal(clearFullBlockData, decryptedFullData) {
      if bytes.Equal(clearLastBlockData, decryptedLastBlock) {
         log.Print(`Success!`)
      } else {
         log.Fatalf(`Decrypted last block '%02x' does not match clear data last block '%02x'`, decryptedLastBlock, clearLastBlockData)
      }
   } else {
      log.Fatalf(`Decrypted full block data '%02x' does not match clear full block data '%02x'`, decryptedFullData, clearFullBlockData)
   }
}

// ******** Private functions ********

// doEncryptionWithPadLastBlock encrypts a slice of data.
func doEncryptionWithPadLastBlock(
   blockCipher cipher.Block,
   iv []byte,
   padder *blockpad.BlockPad,
   clearData []byte,
) ([]byte, []byte, error) {
   // 1. Create block mode from cipher.
   encrypter := cipher.NewCBCEncrypter(blockCipher, iv)

   // 2. Pad clear data.
   fullBlockData, lastBlock := padder.PadLastBlock(clearData)

   // 3. Encrypt padded data.
   // After this, fullBlockData and lastBlock contain the encrypted padded data.
   encrypter.CryptBlocks(fullBlockData, fullBlockData)
   encrypter.CryptBlocks(lastBlock, lastBlock)

   return fullBlockData, lastBlock, nil
}

// doDecryptionWithPadLastBlock decrypts a slice of data.
func doDecryptionWithPadLastBlock(
   blockCipher cipher.Block,
   iv []byte,
   padder *blockpad.BlockPad,
   encryptedFullBlockData []byte,
   encryptedLastBlock []byte,
) ([]byte, []byte, error) {
   // 1. Create block mode from cipher.
   decrypter := cipher.NewCBCDecrypter(blockCipher, iv)

   decrypter.CryptBlocks(encryptedFullBlockData, encryptedFullBlockData)
   decrypter.CryptBlocks(encryptedLastBlock, encryptedLastBlock)

   // 3. Unpad padded data.
   unpaddedLastBlock, err := padder.Unpad(encryptedLastBlock)
   if err != nil {
      return nil, nil, err
   }

   return encryptedFullBlockData, unpaddedLastBlock, nil
}
```

## Contact

Frank Schwab ([Mail](mailto:github.sfdhi@slmails.com "Mail"))

## License

This source code is published under the [Apache License V2](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt).

## Appendix

### Constant time

There exists a class of attacks on encryption that is called [side-channel attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side-channel_attack).
These attacks work by observing some physical quantity like the time it takes for an operation to complete, the power consumption of the processor, electromagnetic radiation from the computer board, etc.

A [timing attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timing_attack) is the simplest of these attacks.
In this case, an external attacker can determine from the processing time of the padding or unpadding how many bytes of the last block are padded.
This is valuable information that can help to determine the type of data.

In order to thwart this attack all padding and unpadding in this package has been built to use nearly constant-time regardless of the padding lengths.

#### Measurements

How does this affect padding and unpadding time?
Here are some measurements that were taken on the development machine.
It features an i7-10510U running at 1.80GHz.

All benchmarks were run 5 times on `Best performance` power mode.
An entry contains the minimum value of these 5 runs.
All measurements used a block size of 16 bytes, as it is the one most frequently used.
All times are nanoseconds per call.
There is always one entry for a padding of 1 byte and a padding of 15 bytes.

##### Straight-forward implementation

For comparison here are the execution times for the straight-forward implementations.

First the times for the `Pad` function with `PKCS#7` padding:

|   Type   | Time   |
|:--------:|:------:|
|  1 byte  |  101   |
| 15 bytes |  138   |

The times for 1 byte padding and 15 bytes padding differ by 37%.
They are clearly distinguishable.

Next there are the times for the `Unpad` function:

| Type                        | 1 byte  | 15 bytes  |
|-----------------------------|:-------:|:---------:|
| PKCS#7                      |   13    |    20     |
| X.923                       |   14    |    19     |
| ISO 10126                   |   13    |    13     |
| RFC 4303                    |   14    |    23     |
| ISO 7816-4                  |   13    |    24     |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |   13    |    22     |

Here also the execution times for 1 and 15 bytes padding are clearly distinguishable, except for `ISO 10126` padding.

##### Constant-time implementation

Now follow the measurements for the constant-time implementations.

First, there is a comparison of the constant-time `Pad` functions:

| Type                        | 1 byte | 15 bytes |
|-----------------------------|:------:|:--------:|
| Zero                        |  104   |   103    |
| PKCS#7                      |  108   |   107    |
| X.923                       |  102   |   102    |
| ISO 10126                   |  324   |   318    |
| RFC 4303                    |  142   |   140    |
| ISO 7816-4                  |  131   |   127    |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |  150   |   153    |

As one can see the execution times for 1 byte and 15 bytes of padding are nearly identical.

Next, there is a comparison of the constant-time `PadLastBlock` functions:

| Type                        |1 byte | 15 bytes |
|-----------------------------|:-----:|:--------:|
| Zero                        |  48   |    48    |
| PKCS#7                      |  55   |    56    |
| X.923                       |  47   |    47    |
| ISO 10126                   |  229  |   227    |
| RFC 4303                    |  55   |    58    |
| ISO 7816-4                  |  47   |    46    |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |  66   |    67    |

Again, the execution times for 1 byte and 15 bytes of padding are nearly identical.

At last, there are the execution times for the constant-time `Unpad` functions:

| Type                        | 1 byte | 15 bytes |
|-----------------------------|:------:|:--------:|
| Zero                        |   19   |    20    |
| PKCS#7                      |   22   |    23    |
| X.923                       |   22   |    23    |
| ISO 10126                   |   11   |    11    |
| RFC 4303                    |   22   |    23    |
| ISO 7816-4                  |   29   |    29    |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |   18   |    20    |

Again, the execution times for 1 byte and 15 bytes of unpadding are nearly identical.

Commit message:

fix: Added function types to examples.

README.md, after:

# blockpad

A [Go](https://go.dev) package for block cipher paddings.

## Introduction

One type of encryption is the so-called [block cipher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher).
This means that data is processed in blocks of bytes and not byte by byte.
Block ciphers are substitution ciphers.
One block of data is substituted by another block.
The advantage of blocks is that they allow a large mapping space.

However, this type of processing leads to some practical challenges.
Block ciphers need to be used in a specific [mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation).
Some of these modes require that the data are processed in blocks.
These "classic" modes are known by their abbreviations [ECB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Electronic_codebook_(ECB)), [CBC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Cipher_block_chaining_(CBC)) or [PCBC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Propagating_cipher_block_chaining_(PCBC)).

When the last bytes of the clear data are processed a challenge appears:
Most of the time the last clear data will not fill a block completely.
So there has to be a way to know where the real data in the last block ends.
This process is called [padding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)).

Nowadays, usually [AEAD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authenticated_encryption) modes are used, which have built-in integrity protection.
The corresponding modes are referred to as [CCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CCM_mode), [EAX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EAX_mode) , [GCM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galois/Counter_Mode), [OCB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OCB_mode) or [SIV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation#Synthetic_initialization_vector_(SIV)).
These have the advantage that they do not need padding and have a built-in integrity protection.
Attacks such as a [padding oracle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_oracle_attack) are not possible with these modes.
However, the classic modes with additional integrity protection, e.g. through HMACs, are still justified as they are cryptographically more secure than the AEAD modes.
Also, the AEAD modi are sometimes just not feasible, as they can not chain data.

Go has an excellent library of cryptographic primitives.
Strangely, however, it lacks any support for padding.
This library fills that gap and provides an easy-to-use interface for padding and unpadding of data.
Furthermore, padding and unpadding is nearly constant time (see [Appendix](#constant-time)).

## Usage

First one has to create a padder.
This is a data structure that is able to pad or unpad data.
It is created by calling the `NewBlockPad` function:

```
   padder, err := blockpad.NewBlockPad(padAlgorithm, blockSize)
```

`blockSize` is the size of the underlying block cipher's block size.
`padAlgorithm` specifies the pad algorithm to use.
It has one of the following values:

| padAlgorithm        | Meaning                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Zero`              | [Zero padding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#Zero_padding) (ISO 10118-1 and ISO 9797-1 method 1) |
| `PKCS7`             | [PKCS#7 padding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#PKCS#5_and_PKCS#7) (RFC 5652)                     |
| `X923`              | [ANSI X.923](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#ANSI_X9.23) padding                                   |
| `ISO10126`          | [ISO 10126](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#ISO_10126) padding. This is the fastest to unpad.      |
| `RFC4303`           | [RFC 4303](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4303#section-2.4) padding                                           |
| `ISO78164`          | [ISO 7816-4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#ISO/IEC_7816-4) padding (ISO 9797-1 method 2)         |
| `ArbitraryTailByte` | [Arbitrary tail byte padding](https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/098.pdf)                                                     |

> [!CAUTION]
> With CBC mode, nearly all the padding methods enable a very dangerous attack, the so-called padding oracle.
> They must only be used with integrity protection, e.g. by an [HMAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HMAC).
> Only arbitrary tail byte padding is not susceptible to this attack.
> An integrity protection is **always** advisable.

> [!CAUTION]
> When using Zero padding the clear data **must not** end with a 0 byte.
> Zero padding panics if the clear data ends with a 0 byte.

This padder has three public function:

| Function                                | Purpose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Pad([]byte) []byte`                    | Given a byte slice of data, it returns a new byte slice that contains the data with the padding. The new byte slice has a length that is a multiple of the block size.                                                                                         |
| `PadLastBlock([]byte) ([]byte, []byte)` | Given a byte slice of data, it returns a byte slice of the data up to the last block and a new slice containing the last block with padding. The data slice has a length that is a multiple of the block size. The length of the last block is the block size. |
| `Unpad([]byte) ([]byte, error)`         | Given a byte slice of padded data, it returns a byte slice into the original data with the padding removed. If there is something wrong with the padding, the returned byte slice is `nil` and an error is returned.                                           |

### Rational

One may ask why the padding and unpadding has not been implemented with a more traditional call interface like e.g. `Pad(padAlgorithm, blockSize, data)` and `Unpad(padAlgorithm, blockSize, data)`.
There are two reasons for this:

1. Performance: The block size and the pad algorithm are checked only once, when the padder is created. With the traditional interface they would have to be checked on every call, which slows down processing by about 30%.
2. Simplicity: With the creation of a padder the call interface is not cluttered with parameters.

## Example

### Pad

In this example a very simple main program calls an encryption and a decryption function.
It shows how a block cipher and a padder would typically be used for encryption and decryption.
The `Pad` function is used for padding.

```go
package main

import (
	"bytes"
	"crypto/aes"
	"crypto/cipher"
	"github.com/xformerfhs/blockpad"
	"log"
)

func main() {
	data := []byte(`Beware the ides of march`)

	// ATTENTION: Do not hard-code an encryption key! NEVER!
	key := []byte{
		0x7c, 0xa8, 0x69, 0xbc, 0x54, 0xf5, 0x87, 0x99,
		0xf3, 0x89, 0x09, 0xab, 0x33, 0xfb, 0xdb, 0x5c,
		0x84, 0x09, 0x4c, 0x05, 0x23, 0xc1, 0xb1, 0x07,
		0xa5, 0xea, 0x5d, 0xf7, 0xf5, 0x42, 0x77, 0x42,
	}

	// ATTENTION: Never use a constant initialization vector! NEVER!
	iv := []byte{
		0x11, 0x42, 0xcd, 0x7d, 0xf9, 0x98, 0x46, 0x4d,
		0xd8, 0x58, 0xdd, 0x4e, 0xc8, 0x3b, 0xfd, 0xe9,
	}

	// 1. Create block cipher.
	aesCipher, err := aes.NewCipher(key)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Could not create AES cipher: %v`, err)
	}

	// 2. Create arbitrary tail byte padder.
	var padder *blockpad.BlockPad
	padder, err = blockpad.NewBlockPadding(blockpad.ArbitraryTailByte, aes.BlockSize)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Could not create padder: %v`, err)
	}

	// 3. Encrypt the data with a unique iv for every encryption.
	var encryptedData []byte
	encryptedData, err = doEncryption(aesCipher, iv, padder, data)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Encryption failed: %v`, err)
	}

	// 4. Decrypt the encrypted data.
	var decryptedData []byte
	decryptedData, err = doDecryption(aesCipher, iv, padder, encryptedData)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf(`Decryption failed: %v`, err)
	}

	// 5. Check result.
	if bytes.Equal(data, decryptedData) {
		log.Print(`Success!`)
	} else {
		log.Fatalf(`Decrypted data '%02x' does not match clear data '%02x'`, decryptedData, data)
	}
}

// ******** Private functions ********

// doEncryption encrypts a slice of data.
func doEncryption(blockCipher cipher.Block, iv []byte, padder *blockpad.BlockPad, clearData []byte) ([]byte, error) {
	// 1. Create block mode from cipher.
	encrypter := cipher.NewCBCEncrypter(blockCipher, iv)

	// 2. Pad clear data.
	paddedData := padder.Pad(clearData)

	// 3. Encrypt padded data.
	// After this, paddedData contains the encrypted padded data.
	encrypter.CryptBlocks(paddedData, paddedData)

	return paddedData, nil
}

// doDecryption decrypts a slice of data.
func doDecryption(blockCipher cipher.Block, iv []byte, padder *blockpad.BlockPad, encryptedData []byte) ([]byte, error) {
	// 1. Create block mode from cipher.
	decrypter := cipher.NewCBCDecrypter(blockCipher, iv)

	// 2. Decrypt padded data.
	decryptedData := make([]byte, len(encryptedData))
	decrypter.CryptBlocks(decryptedData, encryptedData)

	// 3. Unpad padded data.
	unpaddedData, err := padder.Unpad(decryptedData)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	return unpaddedData, nil
}
```

### PadLastBlock

In this example a very simple main program calls an encryption and a decryption function.
It shows how a block cipher and a padder would typically be used for encryption and decryption.
The `PadLastBlock` function is used for padding.

```go
package main

import (
   "bytes"
   "crypto/aes"
   "crypto/cipher"
   "github.com/xformerfhs/blockpad"
   "log"
)

func main() {
   data := []byte(`Cryptography is fun`)

   // ATTENTION: Do not hard-code an encryption key! NEVER!
   key := []byte{
      0x0d, 0xf4, 0x9f, 0x19, 0xe5, 0xf3, 0x91, 0x5c,
      0x55, 0xc0, 0x32, 0xc8, 0x51, 0x98, 0x3c, 0xaf,
      0x05, 0xf7, 0x17, 0xef, 0x7d, 0xc8, 0x5d, 0xcb,
      0xf5, 0xb9, 0xed, 0x74, 0x86, 0xec, 0xed, 0x7b,
   }

   // ATTENTION: Never use a constant initialization vector! NEVER!
   iv := []byte{
      0xea, 0xce, 0xff, 0x10, 0x4f, 0x6a, 0x65, 0xae,
      0x7f, 0x78, 0xe7, 0x43, 0x2c, 0x02, 0x66, 0xf0,
   }

   // 1. Create block cipher.
   aesCipher, err := aes.NewCipher(key)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Could not create AES cipher: %v`, err)
   }

   // 2. Create arbitrary tail byte padder.
   var padder *blockpad.BlockPad
   padder, err = blockpad.NewBlockPadding(blockpad.ArbitraryTailByte, aes.BlockSize)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Could not create padder: %v`, err)
   }

   // 3. Encrypt the data with a unique iv for every encryption.
   var encryptedFullData []byte
   var encryptedLastBlock []byte
   encryptedFullData, encryptedLastBlock, err = doEncryptionWithPadLastBlock(aesCipher, iv, padder, data)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Encryption failed: %v`, err)
   }

   // 4. Decrypt the encrypted data.
   var decryptedFullData []byte
   var decryptedLastBlock []byte
   decryptedFullData, decryptedLastBlock, err = doDecryptionWithPadLastBlock(aesCipher, iv, padder, encryptedFullData, encryptedLastBlock)
   if err != nil {
      log.Fatalf(`Decryption failed: %v`, err)
   }

   // 5. Check result.
   clearFullBlockData := data[:len(encryptedFullData)]
   clearLastBlockData := data[len(encryptedFullData):]
   if bytes.Equal(clearFullBlockData, decryptedFullData) {
      if bytes.Equal(clearLastBlockData, decryptedLastBlock) {
         log.Print(`Success!`)
      } else {
         log.Fatalf(`Decrypted last block '%02x' does not match clear data last block '%02x'`, decryptedLastBlock, clearLastBlockData)
      }
   } else {
      log.Fatalf(`Decrypted full block data '%02x' does not match clear full block data '%02x'`, decryptedFullData, clearFullBlockData)
   }
}

// ******** Private functions ********

// doEncryptionWithPadLastBlock encrypts a slice of data.
func doEncryptionWithPadLastBlock(
   blockCipher cipher.Block,
   iv []byte,
   padder *blockpad.BlockPad,
   clearData []byte,
) ([]byte, []byte, error) {
   // 1. Create block mode from cipher.
   encrypter := cipher.NewCBCEncrypter(blockCipher, iv)

   // 2. Pad clear data.
   fullBlockData, lastBlock := padder.PadLastBlock(clearData)

   // 3. Encrypt padded data.
   // After this, fullBlockData and lastBlock contain the encrypted padded data.
   encrypter.CryptBlocks(fullBlockData, fullBlockData)
   encrypter.CryptBlocks(lastBlock, lastBlock)

   return fullBlockData, lastBlock, nil
}

// doDecryptionWithPadLastBlock decrypts a slice of data.
func doDecryptionWithPadLastBlock(
   blockCipher cipher.Block,
   iv []byte,
   padder *blockpad.BlockPad,
   encryptedFullBlockData []byte,
   encryptedLastBlock []byte,
) ([]byte, []byte, error) {
   // 1. Create block mode from cipher.
   decrypter := cipher.NewCBCDecrypter(blockCipher, iv)

   decrypter.CryptBlocks(encryptedFullBlockData, encryptedFullBlockData)
   decrypter.CryptBlocks(encryptedLastBlock, encryptedLastBlock)

   // 3. Unpad padded data.
   unpaddedLastBlock, err := padder.Unpad(encryptedLastBlock)
   if err != nil {
      return nil, nil, err
   }

   return encryptedFullBlockData, unpaddedLastBlock, nil
}
```

## Contact

Frank Schwab ([Mail](mailto:github.sfdhi@slmails.com "Mail"))

## License

This source code is published under the [Apache License V2](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt).

## Appendix

### Constant time

There exists a class of attacks on encryption that is called [side-channel attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side-channel_attack).
These attacks work by observing some physical quantity like the time it takes for an operation to complete, the power consumption of the processor, electromagnetic radiation from the computer board, etc.

A [timing attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timing_attack) is the simplest of these attacks.
In this case, an external attacker can determine from the processing time of the padding or unpadding how many bytes of the last block are padded.
This is valuable information that can help to determine the type of data.

In order to thwart this attack all padding and unpadding in this package has been built to use nearly constant-time regardless of the padding lengths.

#### Measurements

How does this affect padding and unpadding time?
Here are some measurements that were taken on the development machine.
It features an i7-10510U running at 1.80GHz.

All benchmarks were run 5 times on `Best performance` power mode.
An entry contains the minimum value of these 5 runs.
All measurements used a block size of 16 bytes, as it is the one most frequently used.
All times are nanoseconds per call.
There is always one entry for a padding of 1 byte and a padding of 15 bytes.

##### Straight-forward implementation

For comparison here are the execution times for the straight-forward implementations.

First the times for the `Pad` function with `PKCS#7` padding:

|   Type   | Time   |
|:--------:|:------:|
|  1 byte  |  101   |
| 15 bytes |  138   |

The times for 1 byte padding and 15 bytes padding differ by 37%.
They are clearly distinguishable.

Next there are the times for the `Unpad` function:

| Type                        | 1 byte  | 15 bytes  |
|-----------------------------|:-------:|:---------:|
| PKCS#7                      |   13    |    20     |
| X.923                       |   14    |    19     |
| ISO 10126                   |   13    |    13     |
| RFC 4303                    |   14    |    23     |
| ISO 7816-4                  |   13    |    24     |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |   13    |    22     |

Here also the execution times for 1 and 15 bytes padding are clearly distinguishable, except for `ISO 10126` padding.

##### Constant-time implementation

Now follow the measurements for the constant-time implementations.

First, there is a comparison of the constant-time `Pad` functions:

| Type                        | 1 byte | 15 bytes |
|-----------------------------|:------:|:--------:|
| Zero                        |  104   |   103    |
| PKCS#7                      |  108   |   107    |
| X.923                       |  102   |   102    |
| ISO 10126                   |  324   |   318    |
| RFC 4303                    |  142   |   140    |
| ISO 7816-4                  |  131   |   127    |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |  150   |   153    |

As one can see the execution times for 1 byte and 15 bytes of padding are nearly identical.

Next, there is a comparison of the constant-time `PadLastBlock` functions:

| Type                        |1 byte | 15 bytes |
|-----------------------------|:-----:|:--------:|
| Zero                        |  48   |    48    |
| PKCS#7                      |  55   |    56    |
| X.923                       |  47   |    47    |
| ISO 10126                   |  229  |   227    |
| RFC 4303                    |  55   |    58    |
| ISO 7816-4                  |  47   |    46    |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |  66   |    67    |

Again, the execution times for 1 byte and 15 bytes of padding are nearly identical.

At last, there are the execution times for the constant-time `Unpad` functions:

| Type                        | 1 byte | 15 bytes |
|-----------------------------|:------:|:--------:|
| Zero                        |   19   |    20    |
| PKCS#7                      |   22   |    23    |
| X.923                       |   22   |    23    |
| ISO 10126                   |   11   |    11    |
| RFC 4303                    |   22   |    23    |
| ISO 7816-4                  |   29   |    29    |
| Arbitrary tail byte padding |   18   |    20    |

Again, the execution times for 1 byte and 15 bytes of unpadding are nearly identical.
